README.md, before:

# Pressure testing open-source instruction finetuned LLMs

This is derivative work of [Needle In A Haystack - Pressure Testing LLMs](https://github.com/gkamradt/LLMTest_NeedleInAHaystack). I intend to carry out the same experiment but for open-source models which I can run locally. Credit goes to him for laying out the groundwork! My goal is to test how well commonly used models in the LLM community fair in simple retrieval within their context window. From @gkamradt's work it's clear that Claude and GPT-4 are inconsistent in how well they handle their context window; but what about our favorite OS models?

**Update:** Anthropic ran their own pressure tests and covered it in [this](https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2-1-prompting) blog post. They were able to massivively improve in-context retrieval performance by priming the model response with `Here is the most relevant sentence in the text:`. I also intend to test how this effects performance.

## The Test

1. Place a random fact or statement (the 'needle') in the middle of a long context window (the 'haystack')
2. Ask the model to retrieve this statement using the following prompt format

```
You are provided with a text of some essays, admist these essays is a sentence
that contains the answer to the user's question. I will now provide the text
(delimited with XML tags) followed by the user question.

[TEXT]
{content}
[/TEXT]


User: {prompt}

Assistant: Here is the most relevant sentence in the text:
```

3. Iterate over various document depths (where the needle is placed) and context lengths to measure performance

## Roadmap

An ongoing list of models to pressure test.

```
1. Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2
```

## Results

Each test consists of a retrieval, at certain depth percentage, for a given context length. The results are combined into a pivot table illustrating how well the model response was, judged by GPT-4. The scoring system is defined as

```
Score 1: The answer is completely unrelated to the reference.
Score 3: The answer has minor relevance but does not align with the reference.
Score 5: The answer has moderate relevance but contains inaccuracies.
Score 7: The answer aligns with the reference but has minor omissions.
Score 10: The answer is completely accurate and aligns perfectly with the reference.
```

I have slightly adjusted @gkamradt's visualization code to work for this project. The code can be found [here](/utils/visualize.ipynb). The raw results are found in `results/`.

### Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 @ 16k

![](/img/mistral_7b_16k.png)

## Implementation

Just a quick note on the implementation. @gkamradt refactored and cleaned the code significantly since I originally started working on this. I don't plan to sync this with his more polished version. This code works fine but it's hacky.

Commit message:

update results and tested mistral without RP

README.md, after:

# Pressure testing open-source instruction finetuned LLMs

This is derivative work of [Needle In A Haystack - Pressure Testing LLMs](https://github.com/gkamradt/LLMTest_NeedleInAHaystack). I intend to carry out the same experiment but for open-source models which I can run locally. Credit goes to him for laying out the groundwork! My goal is to test how well commonly used models in the LLM community fair in simple retrieval within their context window. From @gkamradt's work it's clear that Claude and GPT-4 are inconsistent in how well they handle their context window; but what about our favorite OS models?

**Update:** Anthropic ran their own pressure tests and covered it in [this](https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2-1-prompting) blog post. They were able to massivively improve in-context retrieval performance by priming the model response with `Here is the most relevant sentence in the text:`. All tests using this retrieval priming technique will be suffixed with `rp`.

## The Test

1. Place a random fact or statement (the 'needle') in the middle of a long context window (the 'haystack')
2. Ask the model to retrieve this statement using the following prompt format

```
You are provided with a text of some essays, admist these essays is a sentence
that contains the answer to the user's question. I will now provide the text
(delimited with XML tags) followed by the user question.

[TEXT]
{content}
[/TEXT]


User: {prompt}

Assistant: Here is the most relevant sentence in the text:
```

3. Iterate over various document depths (where the needle is placed) and context lengths to measure performance

## Roadmap

An ongoing list of models to pressure test.

```
1. Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2
```

## Results

Each test consists of a retrieval, at certain depth percentage, for a given context length. The results are combined into a pivot table illustrating how well the model response was, judged by GPT-4. The scoring system is defined as

```
Score 1: The answer is completely unrelated to the reference.
Score 3: The answer has minor relevance but does not align with the reference.
Score 5: The answer has moderate relevance but contains inaccuracies.
Score 7: The answer aligns with the reference but has minor omissions.
Score 10: The answer is completely accurate and aligns perfectly with the reference.
```

I have slightly adjusted @gkamradt's visualization code to work for this project. The code can be found [here](/utils/visualize.ipynb). The raw results are found in `results/`.

### Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 @ 16k

This model is trained on 8k context but features a theoretical context window of up to 128k, made possible through sliding window attention.

![](/img/mistral_7b_16k.png)

### Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 @ 16k [RP]

Using the retrieval priming technique from Anthropic, results improve **tremendously**.The model is capable of handling contexts exceeding 8k. However, its performance is characterized by volatility; it tends to either achieve flawless success or encounter complete failure.

![](/img/mistral_7b_16k_rp.png)

## Implementation

Just a quick note on the implementation. @gkamradt refactored and cleaned the code significantly since I originally started working on this. I don't plan to sync this with his more polished version. This code works fine but it's hacky.
